doc: Merges CLOUDP-274025 docs & examples branch - DONT MERGE YET (#3079)
mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas: examples/migrate_cluster_to_advanced_cluster/basic/README.md

# Basic Migration from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`

The purpose of this example is to show how a `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource can be migrated to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`.
In this example we use specific files, but the same approach can be applied to any configuration file with `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource(s).

> The main steps are:

Reviewer: Should we reference the migration guide in case users wants more details?

Reviewer 2: Thanks! Changed in 9d3c89252ff66dfe1b0fb1bc840b424603b7bfec

> This example demonstrates how to migrate a `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` (see alternatives, and more details in the [cluster to advanced cluster migration guide](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/guides/cluster-to-advanced-cluster-migration-guide).)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This example demonstrates how to migrate a `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` (see alternatives, and more details in the [cluster to advanced cluster migration guide](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/guides/cluster-to-advanced-cluster-migration-guide)).
```

Author: already changed

> The purpose of this example is to show how a `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource can be migrated to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` (see alternatives, and more details in the [cluster to advanced cluster migration guide](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/guides/cluster-to-advanced-cluster-migration-guide).)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This example demonstrates how to migrate a `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` (see alternatives, and more details in the [cluster to advanced cluster migration guide](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/guides/cluster-to-advanced-cluster-migration-guide).)
```

- [Create the `mongodbatlas_cluster`](#create-the-mongodbatlas_cluster) (skip if you already have a configuration with one or more `mongodbatlas_cluster` resources)

> - [Use the Atlas CLI Plugin Terraform to create the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resources](#use-the-atlas-cli-plugin-terraform-to-create-the-mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster-resource)

Reviewer 5: sorry if I provided this feedback already, but should it be clear that this does not create the resource but only the configuration?

Reviewer 2: Changed in 9d3c89252ff66dfe1b0fb1bc840b424603b7bfec

> - [Create the `mongodbatlas_cluster`](#create-the-mongodbatlas_cluster) (skip if you already have a configuration with one or more `mongodbatlas_cluster` resources)

Reviewer 3: should this be an ordered list?

Author: changed

> - [Manual updates to the Terraform configuration](#manual-updates-to-the-terraform-configuration)

Reviewer 3: parallelism with the other list items
```suggestion
- [Manually update the Terraform configuration](#manual-updates-to-the-terraform-configuration)
```

Author: already changed

- [Perform the Move](#perform-the-move)
  - [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Create the `mongodbatlas_cluster`

> **Note**: This step is only to demonstrate the migration. If you want to manage a cluster with Terraform, we recommend you use a `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` instead.

Reviewer 5: Link to the preview v2 doc for `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`?

Reviewer 2: Thanks. Changed in 9d3c89252ff66dfe1b0fb1bc840b424603b7bfec

> **Note**: This step is only to demonstrate the migration. If you want to manage a cluster with Terraform, we recommend you use a [mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/resources/advanced_cluster%2520%2528preview%2520provider%2520v2%2529) instead.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Note**: This step is only to demonstrate the migration. If you want to manage a cluster with Terraform, we recommend you use a [mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/resources/advanced_cluster%2520%2528preview%2520provider%2520v2%2529) resource instead.
```

Author: changed

This step can be skipped if you already have a configuration file with a `mongodbatlas_cluster` created.

> 1. Uncomment the code in [outputs.tf](outputs.tf) (lines marked with `# BEFORE`) and [cluster.tf](cluster.tf)
> 2. Comment the code in [outputs.tf](outputs.tf) (lines marked with `# AFTER`) and [advanced_cluster.tf](advanced_cluster.tf) 

Reviewer 3: for these steps, do you uncomment the marked lines in both files? if so, I think adjustments can me made for clarity
```suggestion
1. Uncomment the code in [outputs.tf](outputs.tf) and [cluster.tf](cluster.tf) (lines marked with `# BEFORE`).
2. Comment the code in [outputs.tf](outputs.tf) and [advanced_cluster.tf](advanced_cluster.tf)  (lines marked with `# AFTER`). 
```

Reviewer 2: No. Only in the `outputs.tf`

Author: we inverted the order to make it clear that lines comment was only for output :-)

3. Create a `vars.auto.tfvars` file, for example:
```terraform
project_id = "{PROJECT_ID}" # replace with your project ID, should be similar to 664619d870c247237f4b86a6
cluster_name = "cluster-mig-resource"
instance_size = "M10"
mongo_db_major_version = "8.0"
```
4. Run `terraform init`
5. Run `terraform apply`

> ## Use the [Atlas CLI Plugin Terraform](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform) to create the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource
> The CLI Plugin helps you convert your existing configuration into one using the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource. This step is not required but recommended; alternatively you can write the equivalent configuration on your own.

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't recommend adding a link to a heading. Instead, convert the text on the next line to a link
```suggestion
## Use the Atlas CLI Plugin Terraform to create the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource
The [CLI Plugin](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform) helps you convert your existing configuration into one using the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource. This step is not required but recommended; alternatively you can write the equivalent configuration on your own.
```

Author: changed

4. Run `atlas tf clusterToAdvancedCluster --file {CLUSTER_IN}.tf --output {CLUSTER_OUT}.tf`
   1. For example `cluster.tf` for `{CLUSTER_IN}.tf`
   2. For example `advanced_cluster.tf` for `{CLUSTER_OUT}.tf`
   3. If your config is not supported, see [limtations](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform?tab=readme-ov-file#limitations) of the plugin, try to update your `mongodbatlas_cluster`, or see alternatives in the [Migration Guide: Cluster to Advanced Cluster](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/guides/cluster-to-advanced-cluster-migration-guide)

## Manual updates to the Terraform configuration
1. Ensure all references are updated (see example of updates in [outputs.tf](outputs.tf))
2. Comment out the `mongodbatlas_cluster` in `{CLUSTER_IN}.tf`
3. Add the moved block for each resource migrated in `{CLUSTER_OUT}.tf`
```terraform
moved {
  from = mongodbatlas_cluster.this # change `this` to your specific resource identifier
  to   = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this # change `this` to your specific resource identifier
}
```

> - The [moved block](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/modules/develop/refactoring#moved-block-syntax) can be kept to record where you have historically moved or renamed an object

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The [moved block](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/modules/develop/refactoring#moved-block-syntax) can be kept to record where you have historically moved or renamed an object.
```

Author: already changed

## Perform the Move

> 1. Ensure you are using V2 schema: `export MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Ensure you are using V2 schema: `export MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true`.
```

Author: changed

2. Run `terraform validate` to ensure there are no missing reference updates. You might see errors like:
   - `Error: Reference to undeclared resource`: You forgot to update the resource type to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`
   ```text
    │   on outputs.tf line 7, in output "container_id":
    │    7:     value = mongodbatlas_cluster.this.replication_specs[0].container_id
   ```
   - `Error: Unsupported attribute`:  The attribute is no longer supported in `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` and needs to be removed.
   ```text
    │   on outputs.tf line 7, in output "provider_name":
    │    7:   value = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this.provider_name
    │ 
    │ This object has no argument, nested block, or exported attribute named "provider_name".
   ```

> 3. Run `terraform apply` and accept the move

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Run `terraform apply` and accept the move.
```

Author: changed

   - You should expect to see

>    - `Terraform will perform the following actions:`

Reviewer 3: should this be part of the code block?

Author: changed

   ```text
    # mongodbatlas_cluster.this has moved to mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this
        resource "mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster" "this" {
            name                                 = "cluster-mig-resource"
            # (24 unchanged attributes hidden)
        }

    Plan: 0 to add, 0 to change, 0 to destroy.
    Do you want to perform these actions?
        Terraform will perform the actions described above.
        Only 'yes' will be accepted to approve.

        Enter a value:
   ```
   - Type `yes` and hit enter

### Troubleshooting
- You might see: `Changes to Outputs`, consider where the output is used and take action accordingly.
```text
container_id               = "67a09ae45cc3a60e55b6f42d" -> "67ac794392f9196661de88e1"
```

> - If there are any Plan Changes, try updating the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` in `{CLUSTER_OUT}.tf` manually

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If there are any plan changes, try updating the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` in `{CLUSTER_OUT}.tf` manually
```

Author: changed

1. Ensure you have the Atlas CLI [installed](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/cli/current/install-atlas-cli/) by running `atlas --version`.
   - You should see a multi line output starting with `atlascli version: 1.38.0` (or a later version).
2. Install the Terraform CLI plugin: `atlas plugin install mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform`.
3. Run `atlas terraform` to ensure the plugin was installed correctly.
   - You should see a multi line output starting with `Utilities for Terraform's MongoDB Atlas Provider`.
4. Run `atlas tf clusterToAdvancedCluster --file {CLUSTER_IN}.tf --output {CLUSTER_OUT}.tf`.
   1. For example `cluster.tf` for `{CLUSTER_IN}.tf`.
   2. For example `advanced_cluster.tf` for `{CLUSTER_OUT}.tf`.
   3. If your config is not supported, see [limtations](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform?tab=readme-ov-file#limitations) of the plugin, try to update your `mongodbatlas_cluster`, or see alternatives in the [Migration Guide: Cluster to Advanced Cluster](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/guides/cluster-to-advanced-cluster-migration-guide).

## Manual updates to the Terraform configuration

> 1. Ensure all references are updated (see example of updates in [outputs.tf](outputs.tf))

Reviewer 5: @EspenAlbert shouldn't we modify this so customer don't incur into the variable output changes?

Reviewer 2: Thanks. Added todo here: a8b9c007494629d10e99628dfe4f186c44aadd1e

## Manual updates to the Terraform configuration

1. Ensure all references are updated (see example of updates in [outputs.tf](outputs.tf))
   1. TODO: Add warning about output references based on findings in [output investigation](https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/CLOUDP-303685)
2. Comment out the `mongodbatlas_cluster` in `{CLUSTER_IN}.tf`
3. Add the moved block for each resource migrated in `{CLUSTER_OUT}.tf`
```terraform
moved {
  from = mongodbatlas_cluster.this # change `this` to your specific resource identifier
  to   = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this # change `this` to your specific resource identifier
}
```
- The [moved block](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/modules/develop/refactoring#moved-block-syntax) can be kept to record where you have historically moved or renamed an object.

## Perform the Move

> 1. Ensure you are using the MongoDB Atlas Terraform provider 1.29 or later

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Ensure you are using the MongoDB Atlas Terraform provider 1.29 or later.
```

> 1. Ensure you are using V2 schema: `export MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Ensure you are using V2 schema: `export MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true`.
```

Author: already changed

> 1. Run `terraform validate` to ensure there are no missing reference updates. You might see errors like:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. Run `terraform validate` to ensure there are no missing reference updates. You might see errors like:
```

Author: thanks @oarbusi , changed here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/4be979fdf4aa77992948a161acc72a7e927bef62

   - `Error: Reference to undeclared resource`: You forgot to update the resource type to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`
   ```text
    │   on outputs.tf line 7, in output "container_id":
    │    7:     value = mongodbatlas_cluster.this.replication_specs[0].container_id
   ```
   - `Error: Unsupported attribute`:  The attribute is no longer supported in `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` and needs to be removed.
   ```text
    │   on outputs.tf line 7, in output "provider_name":
    │    7:   value = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this.provider_name
    │ 
    │ This object has no argument, nested block, or exported attribute named "provider_name".
   ```

> 1. Run `terraform apply` and accept the move.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. Run `terraform apply` and accept the move.
```

Author: already done as in other comment
